# Implementation Guide: ThermalRecorder Module (Milestone 2.3)

## 1. ThermalRecorder Class Structure and Interface

Design the `ThermalRecorder` as a dedicated class responsible for
managing the thermal camera capture, separate from other recorders (RGB
video, Shimmer, etc.) for modularity. It should expose a clear interface
for the lifecycle of thermal recording: e.g. `initialize()`,
`startRecording(SessionInfo)`, `stopRecording()`, and possibly
`startPreview()` and `stopPreview()` for the live feed. Internally, the
class will hold references to the USB camera interface (from the Topdon
SDK) and manage threads for data handling. Key fields might include:

- **USB Camera Manager** -- An object from the Topdon SDK (e.g. an
  `IRUVC` or similar) that handles USB connection and frame streaming.
- **Buffers for Frame Data** -- Byte arrays or buffers for the incoming
  **thermal image frame** and **radiometric temperature data**. For
  example, two buffers of size `width*height*2` bytes (since each
  pixel's temperature is
  16-bit)[\[1\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L60-L63).
  These are reused for each frame to avoid reallocation.
- **Preview Display Component** -- A reference to a UI element (or a
  callback) where frames will be rendered for live preview (e.g. a
  `SurfaceView` or custom `CameraView`).
- **Networking/Sockets** -- A reference to the existing socket or
  network client to stream preview frames to the PC controller.
- **File Output** -- Handles (streams or writers) for saving raw thermal
  data to storage (using the session information for file naming).

The class should implement any common recorder interface if one exists
(for example, if there's an `IRecorder` interface for start/stop, use
it). This lets the main app trigger all recorders in sync easily. It
also promotes extensibility -- if support for another thermal camera or
data source is added later, one could create another implementation of
the interface without changing core logic.

**Internal Workflow:** On `startRecording()`, `ThermalRecorder` should
ensure the thermal camera is connected and configured, then begin
capturing frames (both for preview and saving). It will likely spawn
background tasks (or coroutines) for different duties (discussed below).
On `stopRecording()`, it stops frame capture, closes files, and releases
the camera. The **SessionInfo** (containing session ID or directory)
will be used to determine the output file path and naming for the
thermal data file, ensuring all modalities share a consistent session
naming scheme. For example, if SessionInfo provides a folder or base
name, ThermalRecorder can create a file like `session123_thermal.raw` in
that folder.

## 2. USB Permission Flow and Topdon SDK Integration

**USB Host Permissions:** Because the Topdon TC001/Plus is a USB device,
the Android app must handle USB runtime permission. In the app's
manifest, declare USB host mode support
(`<uses-feature android:name="android.hardware.usb.host" />`) and an
intent filter for the device if desired. Typically, the Topdon SDK
(Infisense library) uses a helper class like `USBMonitor` to abstract
permission handling. On device connection, the app should request user
permission via `UsbManager`. In the Topdon sample, the
`USBMonitor.OnDeviceConnectListener.onAttach()` callback is used to
automatically call `requestPermission()` when a matching device is
attached[\[2\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/README.md#L19-L27).
We can adopt a similar pattern: register a `USBMonitor` (or broadcast
receiver if not using their class) that filters for the Topdon camera's
USB Vendor/Product ID and requests permission when detected. Once the
user grants permission (or if it was already granted), the camera can be
opened for streaming.

**Topdon SDK Integration:** Include the Topdon SDK libraries in the
project. The provided Topdon SDK (Infisense `IRUVC` API) contains native
code (`.so`) and Java classes for camera control, frame processing, and
command (e.g., calibration) handling. According to the SDK docs, certain
support classes (like `Usbcontorl` and `Usbjni`) must be copied without
modification[\[3\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/README.md#L196-L203)
-- ensure these are added to the project as instructed. After adding the
SDK, initialize the camera interface. For example, create an instance of
`IRUVC` (or the appropriate class) with the desired mode: the SDK
supports either **image-only, temperature-only, or image+temperature**
streaming modes. For radiometric data, we will use the **image +
temperature dual output mode**, which provides both the IR image and
per-pixel temperature data in one stream. In the Topdon sample, this was
done by specifying resolution height as double (e.g. 256x384) and using
a dataFlowMode like
`CommonParams.DataFlowMode.IMAGE_AND_TEMP_OUTPUT`[\[4\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L110-L119)[\[5\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L294-L303).
The SDK then returns frames that contain both image and temperature
bytes.

**Device Compatibility:** Both TC001 and TC001 Plus should be supported.
The SDK uses device **Product IDs** to identify compatible cameras. We
should include all relevant PIDs in the USB permission filter or checks.
For instance, the sample whitelist includes `0x3901`, `0x5840`,
`0x5830`,
`0x5838`[\[6\]](https://github.com/CoderCaiSL/IRCamera/blob/806fbb62ffbfab3418b82d4204bbc0efbbcc68d4/libir-demo/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVCTC.java#L61-L69)
-- these likely correspond to different models (the TC001 series and
others). Ensuring our `USBMonitor` or permission logic recognizes these
IDs will allow both the original and Plus models to connect. The TC001
Plus also has a visible-light camera for "fusion", but the IR SDK
appears to treat it similarly for IR output. We will focus on the IR
stream; the Plus's visible camera feed is not accessed via the IR SDK
(and the device does not stream the fused image over USB, according to
spec). Our design remains extensible if future devices add channels --
e.g., we could extend ThermalRecorder to handle an additional visible
feed if needed, but for now we concentrate on thermal data.

**USB Connection Sequence:** Upon permission grant, open the camera
through the SDK. The `IRUVC` class (or its variant) provides a method
`openUVCCamera(UsbControlBlock, ...)` which we call with the
permission's control block
handle[\[7\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/README.md#L66-L74).
Next, initialize the IR processing module: e.g., create the `IRCMD`
instance via `ConcreteIRCMDBuilder` with the appropriate camera type.
The sample uses `IRCMDType.USB_IR_256_384` for a 256x192
sensor[\[8\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L440-L449).
This call loads calibration data and prepares for temperature
calculations. We should check the returned result code and handle errors
(e.g., if initialization fails, inform the user to reconnect or that the
device isn't
supported[\[9\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L444-L453)).
After that, start the camera preview via the SDK (`startPreview()` or
similar), which will begin streaming frames into a callback.

## 3. Frame Acquisition and Radiometric Data Buffering

Once the camera is running, the SDK will provide frames via a frame
callback (often on a background thread). In our ThermalRecorder, we
implement the SDK's **frame callback interface** (e.g.
`IFrameCallback.onFrame(byte[] frame)`). Each frame delivered in
**image+temperature mode** contains two parts: the IR image and the
temperature matrix. Specifically, for a 256Ã—192 resolution device, the
frame byte array length is about 256*192*4 bytes when both image and
temp are included (since each part is 256*192*2
bytes)[\[10\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L291-L299).
The first half typically contains the *thermal image* (often in YUV422
or similar 16-bit format for IR intensities), and the second half
contains the *per-pixel temperature data* (each pixel's temperature as a
16-bit value). The SDK example confirms this splitting: it checks
`if (length >= imageOrTempDataLength*2)` to detect dual-mode frames,
then copies the second half of the data into the `temperatureSrc`
buffer[\[11\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L291-L300)[\[12\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L301-L309).
We will follow the same approach: maintain two byte arrays, one for
image data and one for temperature data. On each `onFrame` call, copy
out the respective portions into our buffers. (The copy ensures we own
the data outside the SDK's memory, and we can then process it without
blocking new frames.)

**Radiometric Buffer Structure:** Each pixel's temperature is encoded
typically as a 16-bit **raw value**. The actual conversion to a physical
temperature (Â°C) might require applying calibration formulas. However,
the Topdon SDK's `IRCMD` module likely does that internally such that
the values in `temperatureSrc` are already "radiometric" (possibly
scaled in hundredths of a degree or some fixed-point Kelvin units). In
practice, we should verify this by simple tests (e.g., measuring a known
temperature and checking the buffer values). For now, we will treat the
`temperatureSrc` array as containing meaningful temperature information
per pixel. We can store it directly or convert if needed (see Section
6).

The **frame rate** of the TC001 cameras is \~25
Hz[\[13\]](https://www.topdon.us/products/tc001-plus?srsltid=AfmBOoo8fJ1BiHiNXsNYkOI6c468tmrv4hOuPYKnV6UDjQrLnYg1rCOQ#:~:text=0),
so onFrame will be called up to \~25 times per second. We must handle
data quickly or buffer it. To avoid dropping frames, the callback should
do minimal work -- ideally just copy the data to our own queue or
buffers and signal another thread to handle processing (display, file
I/O, etc.). The `ThermalRecorder` can use a producer-consumer model: the
SDK callback thread produces frames (copying into a buffer ring), and
worker threads consume them for saving and streaming. This decoupling is
important to maintain throughput.

Additionally, to support **both 256Ã—192 and any higher resolution** (if
a future device offers it), the ThermalRecorder should not hard-code
dimensions. It can query the camera's supported sizes via the SDK. For
example, after opening, the SDK provides a list of supported frame sizes
(`previewList`); logging those can reveal if a device is 256x192 only or
others[\[14\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L432-L440).
The code can select the appropriate mode. Since TC001 Plus uses the same
IR resolution
(256Ã—192)[\[15\]](https://www.topdon.us/products/tc001-plus?srsltid=AfmBOoo8fJ1BiHiNXsNYkOI6c468tmrv4hOuPYKnV6UDjQrLnYg1rCOQ#:~:text=256x192)[\[16\]](https://www.topdon.us/products/tc001-plus?srsltid=AfmBOoo8fJ1BiHiNXsNYkOI6c468tmrv4hOuPYKnV6UDjQrLnYg1rCOQ#:~:text=Sporting%20an%20ultra,display%2C%20making%20it%20easier%20to),
we won't need a different buffer size for it, but the detection logic
makes the module extensible.

## 4. Live Preview Rendering Pipeline on Android

The app should display a **real-time thermal video preview** on the
phone's UI, so users can frame the shot and verify the thermal camera is
capturing correctly. We can implement this with a dedicated **Custom
View** or use existing components: the Topdon SDK sample provides
`CameraView` and `TemperatureView` UI
components[\[17\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/README.md#L154-L163)[\[18\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/README.md#L164-L171).
These likely overlay the thermal image and allow annotations (like
selecting points for temperature). For our use, a simpler approach is to
use a single view to show the thermal image.

**Image Format Conversion:** The data from the camera's image buffer is
in YUV422 (or a similar Y16 format). We must convert it to a displayable
format (e.g., ARGB8888) for rendering. The SDK offers utility functions
in `LibIRProcess` to do this efficiently (e.g., `convertYuyvMapToARGB()`
for pseudocolor or converting YUV to
ARGB)[\[19\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/README.md#L120-L128).
We will utilize these native methods to convert the raw image bytes to
an ARGB pixel array (or Android `Bitmap`). This conversion should be
done off the UI thread, then the ready-to-draw image can be pushed to
the UI.

**Rendering on SurfaceView/ImageView:** One strategy is to use a
`SurfaceView` with a **Canvas**. We can spawn a dedicated **render
thread** (similar to what the sample's `ImageThread` does) that waits
for the latest frame, converts it to ARGB, and then locks the Canvas to
draw the bitmap. The conversion includes any needed rotation correction
-- e.g., if the camera is physically rotated 90Â°, we apply
`LibIRProcess.rotateRight90()` on the image or temperature data as
needed[\[20\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L295-L303)
to orient it upright. After conversion, create or reuse a Bitmap of the
appropriate size. Because the thermal resolution is lower than the phone
screen, we should scale the image for a better view. We can use
`Canvas.drawBitmap()` with a destination rectangle that matches the view
size (maintaining aspect ratio to avoid
stretching)[\[21\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/README.md#L170-L178).
This approach is fast enough given the frame size. For instance, scaling
a 256Ã—192 image to full-screen and drawing at \~15-25 fps is well within
the capability of modern phones.

Alternatively, one could use an `ImageView` and update its bitmap each
frame, but continuously calling `ImageView.setImageBitmap` at high
frequency can cause UI thread overhead. A `SurfaceView` or custom
drawing view is preferable for smoother updates. The sample's CameraView
uses a scaling strategy where it creates a scaled bitmap for the
canvas[\[22\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/README.md#L174-L181);
we can improve on that by using canvas drawing with a matrix or
specifying dest rect, to avoid creating a new bitmap every time (thus
reducing GC pressure). Essentially, allocate one Bitmap (e.g., ARGB_8888
of 256Ã—192) and one for the scaled output if needed, and reuse them each
frame with
`copyPixelsFromBuffer`[\[23\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/README.md#L144-L151)
or similar method to update content.

**UI Thread Coordination:** The rendering thread can either post the
final bitmap to the UI thread or directly draw on a SurfaceView's canvas
(since SurfaceView's canvas drawing can occur on a background thread).
We just must ensure thread-safety when accessing the image data buffer.
Using the `SynchronizedBitmap` provided by the SDK (which seems to wrap
a bitmap with a lock) can be
helpful[\[24\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L20-L23).
We will protect any shared data (like the latest frame buffer) with
synchronization or atomic swaps. The preview should run continuously
during recording (and even when idle if we want a preview outside of
recording). We might start preview as soon as the camera is connected
and keep it on until the camera is disconnected or the user turns it
off.

## 5. Preview Frame Compression and Streaming to PC

In parallel with the local preview, the ThermalRecorder should stream a
live preview feed to the PC application over the existing socket
connection. This allows the experimenter to monitor the thermal video
remotely[\[25\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=Preview%20Monitoring%3A%20Receive%20live%20previews,to%20switch%20between%20IR%2FRGB%20preview).
However, to conserve bandwidth and avoid overloading the phone, we
**compress the frames** before
sending[\[26\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=sending%20full%204K%20raw%20frames,frame%20rate%20preview%20just%20for).
The thermal frames are relatively small (the raw 256Ã—192 image is \~98
KB, and even the Plus's fused image is similar resolution), but
uncompressed streaming at 25 fps (\~2.5 MB/s) could strain the Wi-Fi
network or the phone's CPU. We will implement a strategy to send a
*throttled, compressed* preview: for example, send at most \~10 fps and
use JPEG compression.

**Compression**: After obtaining an ARGB bitmap for a frame (as used for
the preview), we compress it to JPEG (or PNG). JPEG is preferred for
continuous video because it's much smaller and faster; slight lossy
compression is acceptable for preview purposes. We can use Android's
`Bitmap.compress(Bitmap.CompressFormat.JPEG, quality, OutputStream)` to
get a JPEG byte array. At 256Ã—192, a JPEG can be on the order of only a
few KB. We will choose a quality that balances clarity with size
(perhaps \~70-80% quality is sufficient). If performance is an issue, we
could compress the grayscale image rather than the colorized one, or
even send the raw grayscale frame and let the PC colorize it -- but that
adds complexity on PC side. Given the small size, JPEG compression on
the phone is fine.

**Streaming Protocol**: The ThermalRecorder should integrate with the
existing socket protocol used by the system. Likely, the phones
communicate with the PC via a TCP socket or WebSocket with custom
messages[\[27\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=Network%20Sockets%20or%20HTTP%3A%20For,frames%20as%20they%20become%20available).
We can extend that protocol to carry thermal frames. For example, define
a message type `"THERMAL_FRAME"` where the phone sends a short header
(including perhaps a timestamp and frame size) followed by the JPEG
bytes. The PC, upon receiving, decodes the JPEG and displays the frame
in its UI (in the designated thermal preview window). This is analogous
to how the RGB preview might already be handled, albeit the RGB preview
might be using a different mechanism (possibly the PC could be receiving
an RTSP stream or JPEG stills). If an **existing preview streaming**
mechanism is in place (for instance, if the RGB camera preview is sent
as JPEG frames over the socket), we should reuse it: e.g., if the phone
already has a background thread sending JPEGs for RGB, we can add
thermal images to that stream (tagged with an identifier for IR vs RGB).

**Frame Rate Throttling**: We deliberately send fewer frames if needed.
The PC doesn't require a full 25 fps from both phones for monitoring --
even \~5-10 fps is sufficient to observe
alignment[\[28\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=Data%20Upload%2FStreaming%3A%20While%20recording%2C%20the,adb%20pull%20via%20a%20script).
We can skip some frames for streaming. For instance, maintain a counter
and only compress/send every Nth frame (depending on network
conditions). This reduces bandwidth and CPU usage (since compression is
done less often), and prevents backlog on the socket. The **data flow**
should be tuned so that streaming the thermal preview does **not
interfere with the primary 4K recording or the local
preview**[\[29\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=sending%20full%204K%20raw%20frames,the%20operator%20sees%20a%20near)[\[30\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=preview%20frames%20,adb%20pull%20via%20a%20script).
In practice, JPEG compression of a small image and sending \~100 KB over
Wi-Fi periodically is minor, but we will still ensure that if the system
is taxed, we prioritize local tasks (recording to disk) over preview
streaming. For example, if frames start queuing up (socket not sending
fast enough), we drop the oldest unsent thermal frame (better to drop
frames than to stall and potentially affect recording).

**Synchronization**: Include timestamps with each frame (e.g., the
phone's current time or a frame index) in the streamed data. This isn't
strictly necessary for just viewing, but could be useful for debugging
latency or aligning with other data on the PC. Since our preview frames
are not used for analysis, precise sync is not critical, but a timestamp
can help match a thermal preview frame with roughly the same time in the
RGB video if needed.

## 6. Radiometric Raw Frame File Format

A core requirement is to **save raw per-pixel temperature data** for
each frame to disk for post-analysis. We need to choose a file format
that preserves the full radiometric information of each pixel. Options
include saving as a sequence of CSV files, a binary file, or a
structured format like HDF5. We will consider trade-offs:

- **CSV (Comma-Separated Values)**: This would store human-readable text
  of temperatures for each pixel. For instance, each frame could be one
  CSV file with 256Ã—192 numbers. While CSV is easy to open and inspect
  (e.g., in Excel or MATLAB), it is extremely bulky and slow for large
  numbers of frames. It's noted in thermal imaging tools that exporting
  an image as CSV does capture all pixel
  temperatures[\[31\]](https://www.researchgate.net/post/How-can-I-get-the-temperature-at-each-pixel-of-the-IR-image-taken-by-FLIR-T250-camera#:~:text=Hi%2C),
  but those are typically single frames or a few images, not a video
  stream. Writing dozens of CSV per second will likely become I/O-bound
  and consume a lot of space. CSV is therefore **not ideal for real-time
  recording**. We might allow an *optional* CSV export of a single frame
  for verification purposes, but not for continuous recording.

- **Binary Raw**: A custom binary format can efficiently store the data.
  For example, we can create a `.raw` or `.bin` file where we write a
  header (with metadata like frame width, height, and possibly total
  frame count or frame rate) followed by frame records. Each frame
  record could consist of a timestamp (e.g., 64-bit microsecond
  timestamp) and the array of temperature values (each value 16 bits).
  This format would be compact and fast to write (just a file stream
  write per frame). However, it's not immediately readable without a
  custom parser. For analysis, one would write a script (in Python,
  MATLAB, etc.) to read the binary file, given the known width/height
  and format. This is feasible and common in research settings.

- **HDF5 or Similar**: HDF5 is a scientific data format that can store
  datasets (matrices) with compression. For example, we could create an
  HDF5 file with a dataset of dimensions (num_frames Ã— height Ã— width)
  for temperature. This is elegant for later analysis (many tools can
  read HDF5), and it can compress the data significantly (since thermal
  data often has spatial correlation). The downside is that writing to
  HDF5 on Android may require adding a specialized library (since
  Android doesn't have native HDF5 support). There are Java HDF5
  libraries, but they might add complexity and overhead. Given the time
  constraints and the fact that we need streaming writes, a simpler
  binary format might be more practical. We can later provide a
  conversion tool (e.g., a Python script to convert our binary dump to
  HDF5 or CSV offline).

**Chosen Approach:** We will implement binary recording of frames, as it
offers the best performance. We will define a simple format: e.g., a
16-byte header containing an identifier and the image dimensions,
followed by repeating records of
`[timestamp (8 bytes)][frame data (width*height*2 bytes)]` for each
frame. Each pixel's temperature value will be stored as a 16-bit
little-endian integer representing the radiometric reading. The actual
unit of these values should be documented (for instance, it might be
that the value = temperature in Kelvin \* 64, based on some SDK scale
factor, or maybe an absolute count -- we will document how to convert
it). For reference, other radiometric cameras also record raw
temperature data that can be exported to CSV or binary; for example,
Optris's PIX Connect software records *raw, uncompressed temperature
data* and allows export to CSV or DAT (binary) for
post-processing[\[32\]](https://optris.com/us/software/pixconnect/#:~:text=PIX%20Connect%3A%20License,Additionally%2C%20images%20and).
This validates our approach of recording raw data for flexibility in
analysis.

We'll name the file something like `Thermal_{sessionTimestamp}.dat` or
integrate with SessionInfo (e.g., if SessionInfo has a session name or
number, include that). If SessionInfo provides a directory path for the
session, we ensure the file is created there so that later all data from
a session is collocated.

**Radiometric Accuracy Consideration:** The saved values are essentially
what the camera sensor + SDK provided. If needed, we will also save a
small **metadata file** (or metadata block in the header) with
calibration details -- e.g., emissivity setting (if adjustable), and any
constants needed to interpret the raw values. The Topdon device likely
assumes a standard emissivity (like 0.95) and outputs temperature
assuming that. If we have access to the calibration data (the SDK had
arrays like nuc_table, gain mode, etc.), we might not need to store them
for end users, but it's good to record the basics: resolution, frame
rate, and maybe the fact that values are in centi-degrees Celsius or
similar.

**File Size:** Recording every frame's full data will produce large
files, but manageable. Each frame is \~98 KB (for 256Ã—192, 2 bytes each
pixel). At 25 fps, that's \~2.45 MB/s. A one-minute recording yields
\~147 MB of thermal data; a 10-minute recording \~1.47 GB. On a Galaxy
S21/S22 with plenty of storage, this is acceptable for short sessions,
but the user should be mindful of storage if doing very long recordings.
We should document this and possibly allow an option to reduce thermal
frame rate or enable compression. If space becomes a concern, we could
*optionally* compress the raw data with a fast lossless algorithm or
simply allow the user to turn off raw saving if not needed. For now,
meeting the requirement means always saving raw frames for research
fidelity.

## 7. Concurrency: Threading and Coroutine Model

Managing preview, file I/O, and streaming concurrently is critical to
ensure one doesn't block the others. We will utilize multiple threads or
Kotlin coroutines to partition the work:

- **Camera Callback Thread:** The USB SDK likely runs on its own thread
  (the `USBMonitor` uses a thread for
  callbacks[\[33\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L130-L138)).
  This thread will invoke our frame callback with new data. In that
  callback, we do a minimal operation: copy the data to our local
  buffers (or queue) and notify other workers. We must not do heavy
  processing (like encoding or file writes) directly in this callback,
  as it could stall the USB processing and cause frame drops.

- **File Writer Thread:** A dedicated thread (or coroutine on
  Dispatchers.IO) will handle writing the radiometric data to disk. For
  example, we can use a single-thread Executor or HandlerThread for file
  I/O. When a frame is ready, we package it (timestamp + data) and send
  it to this thread (via a thread-safe queue). The writer thread pops
  frames in order and writes them to the file stream. This ensures disk
  I/O (which may occasionally block on filesystem latency) never
  interferes with the capture loop. It also serializes file access so
  that writes happen one at a time (no concurrent writes to the same
  file, avoiding corruption).

- **Compression/Network Thread:** We can have another background thread
  for compressing and sending frames to the PC. However, since we plan
  to throttle this, we might not need a full-time thread running at
  25fps. One approach: whenever a new frame arrives, if it's one we
  intend to stream (e.g., every 2nd or 3rd frame), we dispatch a task to
  a threadpool (or coroutine) to handle it. That task will take the
  latest image, compress to JPEG, and send via socket. Because network
  I/O and JPEG compression can both be done in background, this should
  not touch the main thread. Using a small pool (size 1 or 2) is wise to
  avoid too many concurrent compressions if frames come faster than
  network sends -- we might simply drop frames if the previous one is
  still being sent.

- **UI Thread:** The main thread will be involved only in updating the
  preview display. If using a SurfaceView with a dedicated render
  thread, the UI thread might only be needed if we use an `invalidate()`
  on a custom view. We can also use a small `Handler` posting to
  `Looper.getMainLooper()` to update an ImageView bitmap if we choose
  that route. The key is to not block the UI thread; all heavy lifting
  should be done already when we render. Usually, we'd just do
  `surfaceHolder.lockCanvas()` in our render thread, draw, and
  `unlockCanvasAndPost()` -- this doesn't block the UI thread at all.

Using **Kotlin coroutines**, this setup can be expressed neatly: for
example, use `CoroutineScope(Dispatchers.IO)` for file writes and
network sends (they are I/O bound), and perhaps `Dispatchers.Default`
for image processing (if CPU heavy, though here it's minor). A `Mutex`
or synchronized block can protect the shared frame data. If the codebase
is in Java, traditional threads/handlers will be used similarly.

**Synchronization & Frame Coordination:** We should consider that a
frame consists of two parts (image and temperature). We will likely
handle them together for file saving (both parts go to file) and for
preview (image part for display). Our callback already separates them,
so it can provide one copy of the image bytes to the preview thread and
one copy of the temp bytes to the file thread. Alternatively, we might
not need to copy the image bytes for file saving at all -- only the
temperature bytes are truly needed for raw data recording (the image can
be regenerated from those if needed, but it's not required since we're
saving temperature which is richer). So, to optimize, the file writer
could write just the temp array per frame (since that's what researchers
will use for analysis). We will include timestamps, which can be taken
from a consistent clock (Android's `SystemClock.elapsedRealtimeNanos()`
or similar) at frame arrival, to each
record[\[34\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=synchronize%20the%20two,aligns%20with%20the%20PC%E2%80%99s%20timeline).
The **SessionInfo** or an external sync mechanism might also provide a
reference time; if needed, we could synchronize the phone's clock to the
PC before experiment and then use absolute UTC timestamps for all
devices for easier alignment. For now, recording the phone's uptime
timestamp per frame is adequate to get relative timing.

**Ensuring No Data Loss:** The threads approach should ensure we don't
lose frames under normal conditions. If the system is overwhelmed (e.g.,
very long recordings causing memory pressure), the queues could grow. We
will monitor memory usage -- e.g., we might set an upper bound on the
queue size for streaming; if it's exceeding, drop frames. For file
writing, ideally the storage can keep up with \~2.5MB/s (which it should
on UFS 3.0 internal storage easily). A Galaxy S21/S22 can typically
write at hundreds of MB/s sequentially, so disk I/O is not the
bottleneck; rather, the concern is not to accumulate too much in RAM if
the disk hiccups. A simple approach: use a ring buffer of a few frames
for file writing -- if it ever overruns (which is unlikely), we log a
warning and drop the oldest. In testing, we'll verify that even during
4K recording, the thermal data saving doesn't lag (the phone's I/O and
CPU are powerful enough for this multi-tasking).

## 8. File Management and Session Integration

The ThermalRecorder must integrate with the session-based organization
of recordings. Likely, the app uses a **SessionInfo** object to track a
recording session's metadata (e.g., session ID, start time, participant
info, and file paths for each modality). We will use this for naming and
storing the thermal data:

- When a session starts, SessionInfo might provide a directory path (for
  example, `/storage/emulated/0/MyAppSessions/Session_001/`). We will
  create the thermal data file in that directory, e.g. `thermal.raw` (or
  `thermal.dat`). To avoid name collisions, possibly include the session
  ID or timestamp in the filename. If SessionInfo has a convention (like
  `<sessionName>_thermal.dat`), follow that.

- Ensure that the file is opened at start and **closed on stop**. If the
  user stops the recording via the UI or if the camera disconnects
  unexpectedly, ThermalRecorder should gracefully close the file (flush
  buffers) so that data is not corrupted. Using try-with-resources or
  finally blocks around the writing loop is a good practice. On stop,
  also terminate the background threads or let them finish processing
  any last frames, then release the camera.

- The SessionInfo can also be used to log events: for instance, it might
  have a function to add a note like "Thermal recording started at
  \[timestamp\]" which could be written to a session log. That can help
  later in aligning data. If such logging is part of the system, we will
  add entries for thermal start/stop. Additionally, we can include
  calibration frames if any (for example, if there is a routine to
  capture a flat-field or shutter event, log it).

- **Directory structure**: Each session folder would contain something
  like: `video.mp4` (RGB video), `shimmer.csv` (sensor readings), and
  now `thermal.dat` (raw thermal data). We should also consider saving a
  **thermal preview video** if needed. The requirements don't explicitly
  ask for a thermal video file (they want raw data instead), but in case
  someone later wants an easy-to-view thermal video, we might optionally
  encode the thermal frames into an MP4 (using MediaCodec) in parallel.
  This wasn't requested, but our design is open to that (we could reuse
  the preview frames for encoding a simple MP4 if needed). The primary
  deliverable, however, is the raw data file.

- **Post-recording handling**: Once recording stops, the phone could
  notify the PC that a thermal file is ready. Depending on the workflow,
  the PC might then pull the file (e.g., via the socket or a separate
  transfer mechanism). Since these files can be large, an immediate
  transfer might be optional. The plan suggests either manual retrieval
  or triggered transfer after
  stop[\[35\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=%28because%20streaming%204K%20in%20real,after%20capture%20would%20be%20useful).
  We won't implement the transfer as part of ThermalRecorder itself
  (that likely belongs to a higher-level controller), but
  ThermalRecorder can report the path/filename to whoever needs it (so
  that the PC or the app's UI can act on it).

In summary, SessionInfo integration means ThermalRecorder does not
operate in isolation -- it uses the session context for file placement
and timing. It also should update session state if needed (for example,
marking that thermal data is being recorded). If there is a unified
control that starts/stops all modalities, ThermalRecorder should
register itself with that controller. The design remains modular: the
ThermalRecorder can be tested independently by simulating a session info
and ensuring it writes to the correct location, then integrated into the
full system.

## 9. Performance and Memory Considerations (Samsung S21/S22)

The target devices (Galaxy S21/S22) are high-end phones with powerful
processors and UFS 3.x storage, which is encouraging for our multi-modal
recording scenario. Still, we must optimize performance to avoid dropped
frames or overheating:

- **CPU Load**: Recording 4K video (RGB) uses the hardware encoder
  (GPU/DSP), so CPU is mostly free for other
  tasks[\[36\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=might%20be%20to%20record%20the,by%20timestamping).
  The thermal camera SDK processing (image conversion, etc.) does have a
  CPU cost, but the data size is small. The Infisense SDK is partly
  native and likely uses NEON optimizations for things like color
  conversion and temperature calculations. We will keep the CPU load low
  by using those native methods (as opposed to, say, manually iterating
  over pixels in Java). Empirically, handling a 256Ã—192 frame 25 times a
  second (with perhaps a bit of matrix math for temperature) is trivial
  for the S21's Snapdragon 888 or S22's Snapdragon 8 Gen1. Even adding
  JPEG compression at 10 fps is not significant for these chips.
  Nonetheless, we avoid unnecessary work -- e.g., no creating excessive
  objects each frame (use object pools or reuse byte arrays, Bitmaps,
  etc.).

- **Memory Usage**: Thermal frames buffers are on the order of 100-200KB
  each. Even buffering a few dozen frames won't dent memory on devices
  with 8GB RAM. The main memory concerns are avoiding **memory leaks**
  and not accumulating data indefinitely. We will ensure to release the
  `Bitmap` objects in the preview thread if the activity/fragment is
  destroyed, unregister USB monitors when not needed, and close files.
  The use of large buffers should be static or pooled. For example,
  allocate `imageSrc` and `temperatureSrc` once at init based on the
  resolution[\[1\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L60-L63),
  rather than allocating for each frame. The same for the ARGB buffer
  for display -- allocate once (256Ã—192Ã—4 bytes \~ 200KB) and reuse. The
  only significant memory usage could be the raw file itself growing on
  disk (which doesn't affect RAM, but affects storage). We should check
  available storage before recording and perhaps limit recording
  duration if space is low. We could integrate a check: if free space is
  below a threshold, warn the user or stop recording to prevent crashes
  due to no storage.

- **I/O Throughput**: As calculated, \~2.5 MB/s of thermal data plus the
  RGB 4K video (which could be \~30-60 Mbps, i.e., 4-7.5 MB/s) are being
  written simultaneously, plus Shimmer data (negligible kb/s). So total
  write could be \~10 MB/s worst-case. The internal storage can handle
  this easily (for reference, modern smartphones often sustain \>50-100
  MB/s sequential writes). Thus, disk throughput is safe. We should,
  however, use buffered output streams for writing the thermal file to
  minimize syscall overhead (Java's `BufferedOutputStream` or
  `FileChannel` in burst writes). Flushing IO less frequently (maybe
  every few MB or at stop) can reduce overhead. The downside is if a
  crash happens mid-run, buffered data might not be written -- but since
  we stop properly, flush at stop. We might call `fos.getFD().sync()`
  after closing to ensure data is on disk.

- **Device Thermals**: Running both cameras and Wi-Fi can heat up the
  phone. The S21/S22 have good cooling but are known to thermal-throttle
  under sustained heavy CPU+GPU load. Our workload is moderate (video
  encode is offloaded, thermal processing is light). Still, during long
  sessions, the phone temperature should be monitored. If the device's
  thermal management starts to throttle the CPU, our processing might
  slow or frames might drop. We can implement a simple temperature
  monitor (Android provides battery/cpu temp APIs) and log if
  temperature goes critical. The plan suggests allowing breaks between
  recordings if
  needed[\[37\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=Thermal%2FPerformance%3A%20Recording%204K%20on%20a,processes%20or%20using%20performance%20modes).
  For now, our code doesn't automatically stop on overheating, but we
  will document this as a consideration. The user can be advised to keep
  the phones cool (perhaps using a fan or AC in the room for very long
  experiments).

- **Concurrent Camera Access**: One potential issue on some Android
  devices is opening two cameras at once. Many phones cannot use the
  internal RGB camera and an external USB camera simultaneously due to
  bandwidth or hardware constraints. However, on the S21/S22, using the
  USB camera does not rely on the phone's Camera2 API (the USB goes
  through external interface), so it likely bypasses the limitation that
  Camera2 might have with dual
  cameras[\[38\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=References%3A).
  We have precedent that the device can show up as a UVC webcam. The
  Topdon camera essentially becomes a UVC video source over USB, which
  doesn't contend with the phone's camera hardware pipelines. We expect
  it to work, and indeed Topdon's app allows using the device while the
  phone's normal camera is free. In case of any conflict (for example,
  if the USB bus bandwidth is an issue with 4K video being saved to USB
  storage or something), we will test and adjust. The S21 has USB 3.2
  gen1 on the go, which should handle the tiny data of the thermal cam
  easily.

- **Testing on both S21 and S22**: Minor differences might exist
  (chipset, OS version). We ensure the app requests **USB permission
  every time** after device connect (Android may remember permission for
  a device until reboot, depending on OS). If any issues (e.g., on one
  device the permission dialog doesn't appear due to timing), we handle
  it by possibly using the manifest intent filter with `device-filter`
  xml to auto-grant if the app is default for that device.

In summary, the design decisions (using background threads, efficient
binary formats, hardware encoding, low preview framerate) are all aimed
at keeping the system running in real-time without hiccups. We will
validate that during the test phase.

## 10. Manual Test Plan

To ensure the ThermalRecorder meets all requirements and performs well,
we will conduct a series of manual tests. Below is a structured test
plan:

- **Connection and Permission Test:**

- With the app installed on the phone (S21/S22), plug in the Topdon
  TC001 thermal camera via USB-C.

- Expectation: Android prompts to grant the app permission to use the
  USB device. Grant the permission.

- The app's ThermalRecorder (or a portion of the UI) should indicate the
  camera is connected -- e.g., start showing a preview or at least no
  error.

- Unplug and replug the camera to test the attach/detach handling. The
  preview should stop on detach and resume (after permission) on
  reattach.

- **Live Preview Display Test:**

- Once the camera is connected and permission granted, verify that the
  **live thermal image** appears on the phone's screen. Point the camera
  at various scenes (hand, cup of hot water, ice pack) to see that hot
  and cold areas are visible in the preview. The preview should update
  smoothly (near-real-time).

- Rotate the phone and camera if possible. If the physical orientation
  changes (e.g., phone in landscape vs portrait), confirm that the image
  rotation logic works (the image isn't sideways or upside-down). We may
  need to force a particular orientation for the activity running the
  preview to avoid confusion, or handle rotation via code as
  implemented.

- Verify that the preview quality is acceptable -- no significant lag or
  tearing. Also check that the image scaling is correct (the aspect
  ratio of the thermal image should be maintained; circles shouldn't
  look oval, etc.).

- **Start/Stop Recording Synchronization Test:**

- Initiate a recording from the PC controller interface (this should
  send a START command to all devices). Verify that the phone begins
  recording RGB (the 4K video), starts the Shimmer data stream, **and
  starts the ThermalRecorder** simultaneously. There might be an
  indicator or log message confirming each started.

- Let it record for a short duration (e.g., 10 seconds) and then send a
  STOP command. Verify all three modalities stopped.

- Check that after stopping, the ThermalRecorder closed its file and
  released the camera properly (the preview might either remain on or
  could be turned off depending on design -- ideally, we keep preview on
  for convenience). Ensure that a second recording can be started
  without restarting the app, to confirm proper re-initialization (i.e.,
  do two back-to-back recordings to see no resource conflicts or
  crashes).

- **Data File Integrity Test:**

- After a recording, use Android file explorer or connect the phone to a
  PC to retrieve the thermal data file (`.dat` or `.raw`). Confirm the
  file exists in the expected session folder and has a non-zero size.

- Write a small Python or MATLAB script to parse the file: using the
  known width=256, height=192, read the binary data and reconstruct a
  frame sequence. Check that the number of frames roughly matches the
  recording duration Ã— frame rate. For example, if you recorded \~10
  seconds, you expect on the order of 250 frames. It doesn't have to be
  exact if we throttled or dropped some, but it should be in the
  ballpark and consistent (if exactly 10s and we didn't drop frames,
  it'd be \~250).

- Extract a single frame's data (e.g., the first frame) and visualize it
  as an image (plot the matrix as an image with a color map). The
  thermal structure should be recognizable (e.g., if you pointed at a
  hand, the hand shape should appear in the temperature matrix). Verify
  that the temperature values make sense: for instance, find the max and
  min of the temperature matrix -- are they reasonable (e.g., maybe the
  max was \~30700 in raw units which could correspond to \~30Â°C if
  scaled by some factor, etc.). If possible, convert the raw values to
  actual Celsius using the known formula or by a reference comparison
  (e.g., compare a spot on the image with a contact thermometer). This
  validates the radiometric correctness.

- If any frame appears corrupted (e.g., all zeros or random noise), that
  indicates a problem in our saving logic (perhaps a synchronization
  issue). In testing so far with short runs, we expect none, but we
  should test a longer run (see next).

- **Long Duration Performance Test:**

- Conduct a longer recording (e.g., 5 minutes) to test stability. During
  this, monitor the phone's temperature if possible (the app could
  display it or use an Android system monitor). Also monitor if any
  thermal frames are dropped or if preview slows down over time (which
  could indicate thermal throttling).

- After 5 minutes, stop the recording. Check that the thermal file is
  \~5min Ã— 2.5MB/s â‰ˆ 750 MB (if it's much smaller, maybe frames were
  dropped or we weren't recording at full rate). A significantly smaller
  file might mean we inadvertently were throttling the saving; a larger
  (impossibly large) file might mean something was mis-calculated, but
  that's unlikely.

- Verify the integrity of this file as well (perhaps not frame-by-frame,
  but check beginning, middle, end frames for sanity). Also ensure the
  phone remained responsive and didn't overheat (if the device did get
  very hot, note if any frame drops occurred near the end or if the
  system issued any thermal warnings).

- **Concurrent Operation with RGB and Shimmer:**

- During a test recording, pay attention to the RGB video and Shimmer
  data capture. The goal is that the ThermalRecorder's activity does not
  interfere. For example, ensure the 4K video file isn't getting skips
  or timestamp issues. After recording, play back the 4K video to see if
  it's smooth. Also, check the Shimmer data log to see if there are
  continuous timestamps (no large gaps that could indicate the phone was
  too busy).

- If possible, do a **synchronization check**: e.g., have a LED in view
  of both the RGB and thermal cameras and turn it on/off at a known
  time, then later verify that the event is simultaneously reflected in
  the RGB video and thermal data (within expected time sync error). This
  would confirm that starting both recordings at the same time was
  effective and the data can be aligned (since we timestamped frames, we
  can compare those to video frame times).

- **Topdon TC001 Plus Test:**\
  If we have access to the TC001 Plus model, repeat the above
  **connection and preview tests** with it. The Plus should also be
  recognized (perhaps as a different PID like 0x5840). Ensure permission
  and streaming work the same. The plus's visible-light camera is not
  explicitly used, but verify that having the plus doesn't cause any
  errors in our SDK usage. The radiometric data from plus should be
  equivalent in format (still 256x192 IR resolution). The presence of
  the visible lens might internally allow the device to do image-fusion
  in its own app, but our app will likely just see the IR data. Check
  that our preview looks like a normal thermal image (not, say, an error
  or half the image missing because we didn't handle two channels -- the
  SDK might just ignore the visible channel). Essentially, confirm that
  IR frames come through on the Plus as well.

- **Edge Cases:**

- **No Camera Connected**: Try starting a thermal recording without the
  camera attached (or if permission denied). The ThermalRecorder should
  handle this gracefully -- either queue the start until camera is
  available or immediately error out with a message. It should not
  crash. This scenario tests error handling.

- **Camera Unplug During Recording**: Disconnect the thermal camera
  mid-recording. The app should ideally detect the USB disconnect (the
  USBMonitor onDettach callback) and stop the thermal recording thread
  safely[\[39\]](https://github.com/CoderCaiSL/IRCamera/blob/806fbb62ffbfab3418b82d4204bbc0efbbcc68d4/libir-demo/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVCTC.java#L144-L152).
  The file should be closed properly and the session should mark that
  thermal ended prematurely. The RGB and Shimmer might continue (since
  the experiment might choose to keep going). We should test that
  unplugging doesn't hang the app. Possibly, we'll simulate this
  carefully to avoid corrupting the file. Check the resulting file -- it
  should contain frames up to the point of disconnect and be readable.

- **Multiple Sessions**: Run two sessions in a row and ensure the second
  session creates a new thermal file (not appending to the old one).
  SessionInfo should handle unique naming or new directories, but we
  confirm that data isn't overwritten or mixed.

By following this test plan, we can validate that the ThermalRecorder
meets the requirements: capturing full-frame radiometric data in sync
with other modalities, providing live previews locally and remotely, and
doing so reliably on the target hardware. The tests also help refine any
performance issues (for example, if we notice high CPU, we might adjust
the preview frame rate or other parameters as needed).

Overall, the ThermalRecorder module is designed to be **extensible**
(e.g., easy to adapt if a new thermal camera or mode is introduced),
**modular** (it interfaces cleanly via SessionInfo and a recorder
interface so it can be maintained separately), and **efficient** (using
native libs and proper threading to achieve concurrency without
bottlenecks). By implementing and testing as described, we will achieve
the milestone of synchronized thermal video recording alongside 4K RGB
and sensor data, fulfilling Milestone 2.3's objectives.

**Sources:**

1.  Multi-sensor recording system plan -- outlines parallel RGB and IR
    capture and preview streaming
    considerations[\[25\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=Preview%20Monitoring%3A%20Receive%20live%20previews,to%20switch%20between%20IR%2FRGB%20preview)[\[40\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=Data%20Streams%3A%20For%20the%20preview,frame%20rate%20preview%20just%20for).
2.  Topdon (Infisense) SDK sample code -- shows how to integrate the USB
    thermal camera (permission, dual image+temp frame handling, and
    conversion for
    display)[\[11\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L291-L300)[\[19\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/README.md#L120-L128).
3.  Research discussions on radiometric data -- confirm the approach of
    exporting per-pixel temperature data (e.g., via CSV or binary) for
    analysis[\[31\]](https://www.researchgate.net/post/How-can-I-get-the-temperature-at-each-pixel-of-the-IR-image-taken-by-FLIR-T250-camera#:~:text=Hi%2C)[\[32\]](https://optris.com/us/software/pixconnect/#:~:text=PIX%20Connect%3A%20License,Additionally%2C%20images%20and).
4.  System performance notes -- recording multiple streams requires
    efficient use of threads and hardware encoding to avoid overheating
    or frame
    drops[\[37\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=Thermal%2FPerformance%3A%20Recording%204K%20on%20a,processes%20or%20using%20performance%20modes)[\[28\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=Data%20Upload%2FStreaming%3A%20While%20recording%2C%20the,adb%20pull%20via%20a%20script).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[\[1\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L60-L63)
[\[4\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L110-L119)
[\[5\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L294-L303)
[\[8\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L440-L449)
[\[9\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L444-L453)
[\[10\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L291-L299)
[\[11\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L291-L300)
[\[12\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L301-L309)
[\[14\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L432-L440)
[\[20\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L295-L303)
[\[24\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L20-L23)
[\[33\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java#L130-L138)
IRUVC.java

<https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVC.java>

[\[2\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/README.md#L19-L27)
[\[3\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/README.md#L196-L203)
[\[7\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/README.md#L66-L74)
[\[17\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/README.md#L154-L163)
[\[18\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/README.md#L164-L171)
[\[19\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/README.md#L120-L128)
[\[21\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/README.md#L170-L178)
[\[22\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/README.md#L174-L181)
[\[23\]](https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/README.md#L144-L151)
README.md

<https://github.com/buccancs/topdon-sdk/blob/83329a9fe4ebc275408c872b03aac1f4e13af0b0/ANDROID_SDK_USB_IR_1.3.7/libir_sample/usbir/README.md>

[\[6\]](https://github.com/CoderCaiSL/IRCamera/blob/806fbb62ffbfab3418b82d4204bbc0efbbcc68d4/libir-demo/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVCTC.java#L61-L69)
[\[39\]](https://github.com/CoderCaiSL/IRCamera/blob/806fbb62ffbfab3418b82d4204bbc0efbbcc68d4/libir-demo/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVCTC.java#L144-L152)
IRUVCTC.java

<https://github.com/CoderCaiSL/IRCamera/blob/806fbb62ffbfab3418b82d4204bbc0efbbcc68d4/libir-demo/src/main/java/com/infisense/usbir/camera/IRUVCTC.java>

[\[13\]](https://www.topdon.us/products/tc001-plus?srsltid=AfmBOoo8fJ1BiHiNXsNYkOI6c468tmrv4hOuPYKnV6UDjQrLnYg1rCOQ#:~:text=0)
[\[15\]](https://www.topdon.us/products/tc001-plus?srsltid=AfmBOoo8fJ1BiHiNXsNYkOI6c468tmrv4hOuPYKnV6UDjQrLnYg1rCOQ#:~:text=256x192)
[\[16\]](https://www.topdon.us/products/tc001-plus?srsltid=AfmBOoo8fJ1BiHiNXsNYkOI6c468tmrv4hOuPYKnV6UDjQrLnYg1rCOQ#:~:text=Sporting%20an%20ultra,display%2C%20making%20it%20easier%20to)
TC001 Plus (Android Devices) -- TOPDON USA

<https://www.topdon.us/products/tc001-plus?srsltid=AfmBOoo8fJ1BiHiNXsNYkOI6c468tmrv4hOuPYKnV6UDjQrLnYg1rCOQ>

[\[25\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=Preview%20Monitoring%3A%20Receive%20live%20previews,to%20switch%20between%20IR%2FRGB%20preview)
[\[26\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=sending%20full%204K%20raw%20frames,frame%20rate%20preview%20just%20for)
[\[27\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=Network%20Sockets%20or%20HTTP%3A%20For,frames%20as%20they%20become%20available)
[\[28\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=Data%20Upload%2FStreaming%3A%20While%20recording%2C%20the,adb%20pull%20via%20a%20script)
[\[29\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=sending%20full%204K%20raw%20frames,the%20operator%20sees%20a%20near)
[\[30\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=preview%20frames%20,adb%20pull%20via%20a%20script)
[\[34\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=synchronize%20the%20two,aligns%20with%20the%20PC%E2%80%99s%20timeline)
[\[35\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=%28because%20streaming%204K%20in%20real,after%20capture%20would%20be%20useful)
[\[36\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=might%20be%20to%20record%20the,by%20timestamping)
[\[37\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=Thermal%2FPerformance%3A%20Recording%204K%20on%20a,processes%20or%20using%20performance%20modes)
[\[38\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=References%3A)
[\[40\]](file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa#:~:text=Data%20Streams%3A%20For%20the%20preview,frame%20rate%20preview%20just%20for)
Updated_Plan_for_Multi_Sensor_Recording_System_Android\_+\_PC.docx

<file://file-9JgS9hNU2GwaXbC4UsQQGa>

[\[31\]](https://www.researchgate.net/post/How-can-I-get-the-temperature-at-each-pixel-of-the-IR-image-taken-by-FLIR-T250-camera#:~:text=Hi%2C)
How can I get the temperature at each pixel of the IR image taken by
FLIR T250 camera? \| ResearchGate

<https://www.researchgate.net/post/How-can-I-get-the-temperature-at-each-pixel-of-the-IR-image-taken-by-FLIR-T250-camera>

[\[32\]](https://optris.com/us/software/pixconnect/#:~:text=PIX%20Connect%3A%20License,Additionally%2C%20images%20and)
PIX Connect: License-free Software for IR Cameras - Optris

<https://optris.com/us/software/pixconnect/>
